# storm_analytics
### Data analysis project for C S 329E, handling storm data with a Darwin SDK from SparkCognition.

#### Problem  

We created a model which analyzed past weather events throughout the US to predict property damage possibly caused by future events. The model can be used to help insurers and homeowners make educated decisions about property damage and how to handle severe weather.      

#### Data Sets

##### /data_details/
StormEvents_details-ftp_v1.0_d{year}_c{data}.csv.gz: From the raw dataset, there is a .csv for all weather events each year from 2008 to 2018.       

##### /event_subsets/   

Used to hold subsets before they are uploaded to Darwin. These subset csvs are generated by the notebooks before upload, so they are not included in here to reduce space.

#### Jupyter Notebooks   

Explore_Clean_Engineer.ipynb : Explores, cleans, and engineers useful features into the dataset. The dimensionality of the dataset was reduced by dropping redundant or unhelpful roles, while features believed to be more helpful, such as duration, were added to the dataset.

Heavy_Rain_Model_Annotated.ipynb: Predicting how much property damage heavy rain events will cause with binning and Darwin's supervised learning algorithm. It has unexpectedly high accuracy scores, likely due to the data being unbalanced. 

Tornado_Model_Annotated.ipynb: Predicts property damage bins from tornados using Darwin's supervised learning algorithm. It predicts how much property damage tornado events will cause but has low accuracy and F1 scores.

Flood_model_Annotated.ipynb: Predicts property damage from flooding with binning using Darwin's supervised learning algorithm. The model was 74% accurate on the test dataset.

Hail_model_Annotated.ipynb: Predicts property damage from hail with binning using Darwin's supervised learning algorithm. The model was 99% accurate on the test dataset, but is likely a poor model because the data is highly imbalanced and the model produced low F1 scores for any class except the majority class.

Wind_Bag_of_Words_Attempt.ipynb - Attempts to create a bag-of-words addendum to improve usage of the text fields provied in the dataset, but failed due to memory issues.

Wind_model_Annotated.ipynb - Predicts property damage from wind with binning using Darwin's supervised learning algorithm. The model was 73% accurate on the test dataset.


#### Datasets

clean_storm_dataset.csv: The cleaned and engineered data resulting from the Explore_Clean_Engineer notebook.